\documentclass[sigplan]{acmart}

% remove ACM copyright blocks (found at: http://goo.gl/6zcKds)
\settopmatter{printacmref=false}
\renewcommand\footnotetextcopyrightpermission[1]{}
\pagestyle{plain}

\begin{document}
\title{HorseIR : An Array-based Approach to SQL Queries}

\author{Hongji Chen}
\affiliation{
    \institution{McGill University}
    \city{Montreal}
    \state{Quebec}
    \country{Canada}
}
\email{hongji.chen@mail.mcgill.ca}

\maketitle

\section{Problem and Motivation}

Modern software services, such as financial analysis, operate on a vast amount
of data. To address the challenge of querying data, the design of the database
systems and query languages has continuously evolved during the past decade.
Database systems, such as MonetDB\cite{MonetDBHome}, utilize an IR-based
analysis and optimization techniques to meet performance challenges and
introduce user-defined functions (UDFs) to extend the flexibility of the SQL
standard.  However, the conventional IR design hides the details of database
querying steps (such as joining) or separates the IR from the user-defined
functions. These drawbacks significantly limit the context information
propagated to the back-end and render the optimizer less effective.

In this project, we purpose an array-based IR, named HorseIR, which explores
the details of query fully and connects to user-defined functions
transparently. By replacing SQL and user-defined functions with built-in
array-based primitives, HorseIR will enable the back-end optimizer to employ
techniques developed in the programming language research field such as
data-flow analysis, in the hope of handling more flexible queries efficiently.


\section{Background and Related Work}

MonetDB is one of the pioneers in IR based execution engine design
\cite{DBLP:journals/debu/IdreosGNMMK12}. Upon receiving a SQL query, its
front-end compiles the query into a sequence of intermediate representation
codes called MonetDB Assembly Language (MAL), with each instruction mapping to
a built-in relational algebra primitive operation. The execution kernel later
interprets the instructions step by step and generates the query result.

In 1993, Arthur Whitney launched the K programming language
\cite{KLangTutorial} , as a foundation for KDB system. After ten years of
development, K programming language evolves into Q programming language
\cite{QLangTutorial} which provides a more readable interface. Both languages
adopt the idea of array programming; hence they can be easily parallelized
using SIMD or MIMD during execution \cite{HowFastCanAPLBe}. 


\section{Approach and Uniqueness}

The state of the art architecture of MonetDB kernel inspired our design of
HorseIR. Similar to MonetDB, we introduce an intermediate representation, to
handle the complexity of SQL query interpretation.  However, unlike MonetDB,
the syntax and primitives follow the array programming style. HorseIR is a
static single assignment (SSA), statically-typed, array programming language.
It implements most of the primitives in array programming and
database-specific data types introduced in K and Q programming languages.
Compared with the traditional approaches to SQL queries, HorseIR has the
following advantages:

\paragraph{Array-based IR with a Rich Set of Built-in Primitives} In MonetDB,
each primitive captures the operation in relational algebra. Although this
simplifies the design of the execution engine, it hides the details from the
optimizer. Thus in HorseIR, we expose such information to the back-end by
introducing an array-based IR. The primitives in HorseIR are basic array-based
arithmetic (e.g. factorial) or database-specific operations (e.g. table
loading). Thus we can replace each relational operation with one or more
array-based primitives. 

\paragraph{Programming Language Optimization for Database} In the traditional
approach, the optimizations for database queries focused on relational algebra
and execution plan level. Thus, in MonetDB and many other database systems,
minimal optimizations are applied on the intermediate representation level. By
introducing array-based HorseIR, we enable techniques developed in programming
language research field to be applied to database query processing. 

\paragraph{Extensible Framework for User-defined Functions (UDF)} There is no
specification for user-defined functions in SQL standard. However, to improve
the flexibility of SQL queries, many database systems have introduced UDF as a
language extension. However, the implementation and optimization for UDF
introduce complexity in system design. The traditional approach to handling UDF
is to either reduce the language flexibility (used in MonetDB, all UDF are
implemented using hand-written MAL \cite{MALUDF}) or require external linkage
\cite{ExternUDF}. Our solution is to compile the UDF written in an arbitrary
language into HorseIR and later compile the generated intermediate code with
the SQL queries. HorseIR allows flexible UDF implementation and efficient code
generation. Further, we can apply compiler optimization techniques to optimize
the UDF, such as function inlining.

\paragraph{Efficient Parallel Code Generation}
Recent research attempted to introduce parallel computation into database
queries using both CPU\cite{DBLP:conf/sigmod/PolychroniouRR15,
DBLP:conf/sigmod/ZhouR02} and GPU \cite{DBLP:conf/ica3pp/CremerBMM16}
parallelism. These research shows that the performance of database query is
improved significantly using the parallel physical architecture. As HorseIR is
an array-based programming language, it is easy to parallelize array-based
primitives \cite{DBLP:conf/pldi/ImamSLK14}.

\section{Results and Contributions}
\subsection*{Language Design}
Hanfeng Chen (Ph.D. mentor) sketched the general structure and back-end
built-in primitives of HorseIR. I refined the IR and defined the type system.
The type system allows static type checking and function overloading. These
features enhance the performance and the flexibility of HorseIR. The type
system classifies the variables into four unique classes: primitives,
dictionaries, lists, and enumerations. Similar to MonetDB, which uses
"any" keyword to declare polymorphic user-defined functions
\cite{MonetDBPolymorphism}, HorseIR system allows polymorphic built-in and
user-defined function declarations by introducing a particular data type called
the wildcard type. Multiple primitive built-in function implementations are
allowed in HorseIR. The overloading provided by the type system allows the
interpreter to select the most efficient implementation. Unlike MonetDB which
defers the type checking and function dispatching to runtime, HorseIR
will resolve these during compile time, to minimize runtime overhead and
improve the performance.

\subsection*{Front-end and Interpreter Implementation}
During the summer, I have designed and implemented a complete front-end for
HorseIR. The front-end provides a lexer and a parser for HorseIR. Both the
lexer and parser are implemented using ANTLR4\cite{ANTLRHome} , which provides
an user-friendly interface generating robust LL parser. After the parsing, the
front-end transforms the parse tree into a customized abstract syntax tree.
The abstract syntax tree later serves as a foundation for program analysis and
code transformation. From the abstract syntax tree, the front-end can generate
a control-flow graph and a static call graph. An execution engine can later
use this information to interpret the program efficiently. The last component
of the front-end is the interpreter. Connected to Hanfeng's backend, the
interpreter traverses across the abstract syntax tree, and interpret statements
individually.

\section{Conclusion and Future Work}

In this project, we purpose a new intermediate representation for SQL database
queries. The IR provides the queries with a high-performance implementation
and flexible extension. The new system enables high-performance in-memory data
access, that is essential to many software applications. Moreover, the project
provides a new aspect in database query optimization research by employing
programming language techniques. 

By the end of the summer, I have finished the implementation of the front-end,
the interpreter, and a core of the analysis framework. In the future, I would
like to enhance the analysis framework to support more complex data-flow
analysis. 

\section*{Acknowledgements}
This project was done as a summer research project. I would like to
thank Hanfeng Chen for his guidance in the array programming and in-memory
database research fields, Professor Laurie Hendren for her encouragement
throughout the summer, and NSERC for financial support.

\bibliographystyle{ACM-Reference-Format}
\bibliography{UCORE-2017}
\end{document}
